---
title: "As the Streaks Ended"
date: 2024-12-26T17:08:41+01:00
---

Today, two streaks are ending. First, I ended my [Daily Frontend
Grind](https://github.com/patrickbucher/daily-frontend-grind-q4-2024) yesterday
by throwing out the mediocre book _Essential TypeScript 5_. The book doesn't
give me anything the official documentation already does. So I stopped working
on frontend technologies after a consistent effort that started at the end of
September. Maybe I'd like to implement something useful now, so that the streak
can go on, albeit in a different direction.

Second, I suffered a lumbago while rowing today. I first wanted to pull through,
but I gave up after a bit more than 30 minutes and 7 kilometers into my daily
exercise. I probably won't be able to row for two or three more days. A cold
back in September made me miss out a couple of days already. But since then, I
was consistent in my efforts, and even got up earlier since. (I used to get up
at 5:00 o'clock to row for 10 kilometers, now I get up at 4:30 to row for an
entire hour, which is roughly 13-14 kilometers, depending on my daily shape.)

Ending a streak always comes with some relief. The pressure is gone, and one can
start from scratch in a different way. There's also a phase of relaxation that
helps to build up new excitement. Having worked through a mediocre TypeScript
book annoyed me beyond the field of web development; I actually no longer
enjoyed programming. With some distance, the motivation usually comes back after
a couple of days.

### Two Days Later

Today, I already was able to get up at 4:30 again. I rowed for an hour and
managed to do 13.1 kilometers, which is not bad. I intentionally went slowly,
which still was painful enough due to the low temperature in my unheated
exercising room.

I'll also continue in my programming efforts today, continuing the Emacs
tutorial and finally starting with Clojure again. So this short break really
helped a lot. Maybe I'll even have something half-way intelligent to tell about
my efforts in the near future.
