---
title: "Charlatans and Megatrends"
date: 2025-02-03T07:38:37+01:00
---

When you improve something, you start with a problem and think about various
solution approaches. Every solution approach requires actions, which, in turn,
require _tools_ in the broadest sense. The tools are only a means to an end:
first comes the problem, then the solution approaches (plural)—and only then
you start thinking about which tools are the proper ones needed to implement a
the most promising approach.

But I frequently observe quite the opposite: One starts with a tool, which
shall be used to resolve a problem. How the solution approach actually looks
like is neglected. The cart is put before the horse. But is taking the cart
even the best solution? Or is walking or just staying home maybe a more
reasonable approach?

Behind so-called _Megatrends_ are often nothing more than a disguise for a bias
to use certain kinds of tools. Take _Digitalization_ as an example, which is
nothing more than a bias to use computers over other tools to solve all
possible kinds of issues. If it's digital, it must be good; using computers is
good. The actual problems to be solved are hardly analyzed. Solution approaches
not involving the respective tool aren't even considered. The solution space is
heavily restricted right at the beginning by the tool that shall be used.

A charlatan first has to convince his customers that they have a problem, for
which he has the proper solution—or the proper tool for that solution. Again,
first comes the tool bringing forth a solution approach, which then only needs
to be argued into the gap between the supposed problem and a desired solution.

Since the argument starts with the tool, the charlatan's tool has to support
the solutions to a vast set of problems. As snake oil in the Wild West
supposedly cured gullible customers from all sorts of ailments, megatrends as
_Digitalization_, _Artificial Intelligence_, and the _Blockchain_ (at least
until five minutes ago) bring forth the tools supporting the only possible
solutions to all our educational, economical, ecological, and societal
problems.

Charlatans do not care about solving problems, they just want to sell a
product. If those products contribute to a solution in any capacity, or if
their use is even harmful (notwithstanding the opportunity costs of trying
them) is nothing a charlatan looses sleep over. Just sell the solution, and let
the customer deal with the problem: this is how to make a lot of many fast.

Be wary if…

1. somebody wants to sell you a tool,
2. this tool supposedly solves all kinds of different or even unrelated
   problems, and
3. you first need to be convinced that you actually have a problem.

You might be dealing with a charlatan—or a _Megatrend_.
