---
title: "Criticizable Thoughts"
date: 2024-12-02T16:28:09+01:00
---

A thought only becomes criticizable for others when it is written down. Having
ideas is cheap, writing them down less so: Deniability—"I was just thinking 
aloud!"—is gone, and the thoughts can be criticized.

Once you've written something down and handed it over to others, you are somewhat
invested in an idea. Admitting that an idea was stupid comes with a cost. One
has to give the idea up and admit failure. This is nothing bad per se, but not
everybody is used to it.

The more you are invested into an idea, the harder it is to admit that it was a
bad idea.  People who jus talk about their ideas but never put them down in
writing don't have to admit that their ideas are bad, but rather could always
claim that their idea was just misunderstood. As long as the idea was only
uttered verbally, one can say that it wasn't stated in full, and some crucial
bits of it have been withheld.

Once written down, a certain completeness of the idea is expected. There are no
longer excuses that something wasn't written down in full. There are higher
expectations on a written text than on a conversation. One is expected to go
over what was written down before giving it to others. A conversation can always
remain imcomplete, and it's totally OK to continue talking about something later
on.

Ideas can be discussed and further refined in brain-storming sessions and the
like. However, as soon as further action has to be taken to implement an idea,
it first needs to be written down to establish a common ground. This is
especially important if _other_ people than the originator of an idea have to
take action. Otherwise, those people can be blamed unjustly for "not getting the
idea" once failure becomes obvious.
