---
title: "The False Things-Memories Dichotomy"
date: 2024-12-25T10:20:27+01:00
---

People are often using the _Memories Instead of Things_ dichotomy, especially
around Christmas. While it's true that hardly anybody around these parts needs
more stuff (they'd just buy it, if they'd need it), adding some extraordinary
memories doesn't make for a good life either.

Tastes differ, and while some people (especially Baby Boomers, I guess) find it
enjoyable to spend time in Las Vegas or on a cruise ship, those pastimes are the
closest you can get to Hell on Earth in my view.

But it's not about the choice of particular activities (or rather _passivities_,
for that matter): the highs you get from any particular activity just don't
matter that much when you consider your life as a whole.

How do the memories of an exciting holiday make up for the misery of everyday
life in any way? Having just returned from a trip (and dealt with the laundry),
that next Zoom meeting full of midwits is still going to be soul crushing. But
at least it pays the bills, right? Especially those for your next trip to some
_dream destination_, for which you spend considerable time being trapped in an
airplane with annoying people you'd never ever let into your home.

The only thing that matters is your moment to moment experience of everyday
life. Many of those moments are going to suck, so you make them better suck in
ways of your own choosing. I rather get up at 4:30 every morning to spend an
hour on my rowing ergometer than to get up at 6:30 every morning to spend an
hour in a traffic jam. The former kind of suck at least makes me stronger and
more endurable, while the latter kind of suck just sucks.

Do heart attacks become more enjoyable with the memories of the last trip to the
Maledives still present? If the clichee is true that during a near-death
experience you see your entire life unfolding in front of you as a movie, that
video clip better be exciting! However, I don't think this small retrospective
becomes much better by just trying to stuff in extraordinary events into your
life; not in a way that it's actually worth it, at least.

So I'd rather have a life that sucks in the right way for me and avoid the highs
other people get from a few exciting weeks per year while hating their everyday
life, from which they absolutely have to flee time and again in order to sustain
it.
