---
title: "Four Quadrants of Activities"
date: 2024-11-24T06:59:51+01:00
---

Our activities can be classified into four quadrants. The x-axis shows how we're
feeling _during_ an activity, and the y-axis shows how we're feeling _after_ the
activity. Both axes range from feeling bad—left/bottom—to feeling
good—right/top. A z-axis showing how we feel _before_ the activity is not
considered for the sake of simplicity.

The four quadrants are enumerated from top-right counter-clockwise, which gives
us the following categories:

- _Quadrant I_: Activities we enjoy doing and make us feel good afterwards.
- _Quadrant II_: Activities we don't enjoy doing, but make us feel better
  afterwards.
- _Quadrant III_: Activities we neither enjoy doing nor make us feel good
  afterwards.
- _Quadrant IV_: Activities we enjoy doing, but make us feel bad afterwards.

Activities of quadrant I are pure pleasure. Those are playful activities we
voluntarily do, like actual playing or having sex. However, the joy produced by
those activities decrease quickly (under the law of diminishing returns), and we
need to find other activities to do. It's almost impossible to fill one's day
only with purely enjoyable activities, which explains why idle billionaires are
so miserable.

Quadrant II encompasses effortful but rewarding activities. Exercising on a
level that yields health benefits is not enjoyable, but makes us feel better
afterwards. We need to put up with a certain amount of pain in order to reap the
benefits of such activities. Focused learning or productive work belong to this
quadrant, too. Ideally, we enter the state of _flow_, turning work into play
(quadrant I). But the state of flow can only be entered after some initial
strain and therefore is rather to be seen as the reward for a phase of hard
work.

Nobody likes to do the activities of quadrant III. Unfortunately, a big part of
our education and working life takes place in this quadrant. No matter how well
we organize our lives, we have to spend some time doing activities of this kind.
However, if we can reap some reward from the most tedious work, a quadrant III
activity can be turned into a quadrant II activity.

_First Insight_: If we start with an activity that feels awkward, we still might
turn it around to become a rewarding endeavor. If we're happy with the result,
we also judge the strenuous process in a more positive light. Mindset and
organisation are to a large extent techniques to turn quadrant III into quadrant
II activities.

Quadrant IV contains activities that feel good while doing them, but make us
feel bad afterwards. Drugs are the most obvious example. Spending time on social
media, which arguably _is_ a drug, feels the same. However, it's the dose makes
the poison: A dinner party with friends benefits from a couple of drinks, but
once you surpass a certain threshold (let's say: more than five to seven
drinks), the evening might become a bit more enjoyable, but the next day less
so. Quadrant IV activities always come with remorse.

For a lot of people, watching TV is a quadrant IV activity. After a long time of
abstinence (now 17 years in my case), the activity itself doesn't feel good
anymore, but rather nauseating. The same is true for social media or following
the news, after one has stopped using them for a couple of years. Video games
probably were the worst offenders in my youth. They completely overexcite us,
which not only makes it impossible to do any meaningful things for the rest of
the day, but also cause bad sleep, ruining the next day.

_Second Insight_: Weaning yourself off of quadrant IV activities reduces their
appeal.

_Conclusion_: Quadrant I activities are enjoyable, but not sufficient for a good
life, which requires mostly quadrant II activities. With the right mindset,
quadrant III activities can be turned into quadrant II activities. Quadrant IV
activities are harmful, but lose their appeal when abstaining from them.
