---
title: "Less Input, Better Digestion"
date: 2024-11-11T12:28:43+01:00
---

In modern times, the ratio of received input to produced output has shifted in
the direction of more input. Probably output increased also, but not in the same
magnitude as input.

It began with the printing press. Soon, there was more material printed every
day than could be read in a lifetime. Newspapers, radio, television, and the
Internet overwhelmed us with input, so that nowadays there's more information
produced in every second that could be processed in a lifetime.

We have a similar issue with food, at least in the first world: There's way more
available than we could or should consume. There are more people dying from the
diseases caused by excessive eating than due to malnutrition or starvation, at
least in the first world.

So we decided to restrict our food intake both in quality and quantity. And it
becomes increasingly clear that we also should restrict our intake of
information. Quitting or at least restricting social media usage is one option.
Not following the news is another strategy. And so is leaving away all kinds of
digital entertainment from video platforms to gaming. I ditched the news for
good almost three years ago, am no longer to be found on any social media site,
didn't play any games for half a year now, and very rarely watch videos. So far,
this has at least been a time saver. Unfortunately, my ability to focus hasn't
increased considerably, at least not yet.

Most people have a tendency to fill every idle minute with digital input, and so
do I. This is a bad habit, because there's nothing useful to be gained from such
short bursts of the usual low-quality, easy-to-digest content. It also has the
tendency to turn idle minutes into wasted hours or evenings.

I often have this issue when teaching classes. Sometimes, there is just nothing
to do for me, because all the students are working, and the instructions are
clear enough for the students to cope without my help. So how can I fill this
downtime? I could just stand or walk around and wait until there's something to
do for me. This is a good strategy during most classes, where issues usually
pop up within minutes. But for some classes, especially during exams, there are
long stretches with nothing to do, rarely interrupted by a single question.

So instead of reading email, checking something on the web, or starting
something to work that I won't bring far anyway, I tried to do just nothing. And
doing nothing is hard in an otherwise busy environment on an otherwise busy day.
Usually, thoughts pop up: I need to buy groceries after class; there's a book
I'd like to check out; there's a blog post I started reading in the morning but
couldn't finish reading; etc.

So I wondered: Why don't I just write all those thoughts down? And so I did. I
created a private Git repository called "dump", for which I create a single text
file for every day, e.g. named "2024-11-11.txt" for today. And in the text file
I write everything down that comes to my mind. I no longer use idle minutes to
check something out, I use this downtime to write something down.

The best strategy to let go of a thought is to write it down somewhere.
Everybody who writes grocery lists knows this: Once you wrote that bottle of
milk down on your list, you no longer have to think about it—and you no longer
will! This constant writing dump is a very good device to let go of thoughts.
And if there's an original thought once in a while, I could look it up in no
time using a full-text search.

The idea is not to create sketches for essays, but just to fill the idle minutes
with writing instead of reading: less input, more processing: better
_digesting_. And writing is an activity to process one's thoughts. Thoughts are
unstructured fragments made up of words, but they are not proper sentences. Once
you write them down, you have to really think through them. Writing adds more
nuance. When you think "students don't read properly nowadays", then it's just a
random thought. Once you start writing it down, you wonder: "only _these_
students here, or students _in general_?" and: "just _nowadays_, or how was it
during my time as a student?".

A written word has more weight than one solely existing in your mind. It
reflects back from the page or screen and makes you think. Writing down a
thought is a way to actually _finish_ the thought. Thoughts come in fragments,
writing comes in sentences.

This leads me to an interesting hypothesis:

> Proper thinking requires writing down one's thoughts.

One could argue that "writing" could be replaced by "speaking" in the hypothesis
above, for it also requires phrasing: making sentences out of connected words.
But the subject of this blog is _writing_, so I'll stick to that hypothesis.

I already noticed how writing down my random thoughts—instead of filling idle
minutes with more input—calms me down. There's less noise in my mind, and more
room for focus. Furthermore, writing 1000 words a day, which is my average so
far, is a good exercise. (I write my daily dumps in German, but this blog in
English; polyglotism is supposed to be a good strategy to postpone dementia.
Which reminds me to pick up French and Russian again…)

Now I wonder if this frequent writing will improve the quality of my thinking.
If not, it will at least improve my ability to write reasonably well.
