---
title: "More Thoughts on Minimalism"
date: 2025-01-29T13:44:29+01:00
draft: true
---

I wrote about why minimalism works and new year's resolutions don't [the other
day](#15). Since then, I was thinking more about the underlying reasons. There
are different aspects that contribute to the effects observed: The _process_,
the _insight_, and the _result_.

### Process

Last Saturday, I was getting rid of cardboard, paper and some electronic
equipment I could neither use nor sell. I usually rent a car roughly once every
three months, pick up all the things I'd like to get rid of at home, and drive
to the waste disposal facility, where I can dump everything for free.

Driving there with a full car and returning an empty car is quite a relief. But
why wait three months until renting a car for that drive becomes reasonable? If
I only wait for three weeks instead of three months, I'd have much less to
dispose of, and could actually walk there.

And so I did last Saturday. I had two bags of roughly 2-4 kg of cardboard each,
which isn't heavy, but becomes tiresome to carry nonetheless if you walk nonstop
for twenty minutes. I also had a pile of paper, five old plates, and some
electronic equipment in my backpack to get rid of, so I carried quite some load.

Having thrown everything into their proper containers, I walked out of the
facility with two free hands and a backpack only containing the two folded bags
I carried the cardboard in. I could literally feel being relieved from a burden.
Walking back felt great, and I even discovered a small hiking trail leading from
the industrial area to the mall. (I of course never notice that trail when
driving by with the car for the last two years.)

I only knew it the other way around: Going to the store with empty bags and
returning with heavy groceries, but looking forward to the meals I'm going to
cook. Walking to some place to empty my bags not only didn't cost me anything,
but it also felt better than returning with filled shopping bags. Going out with
full bags and return with empty ones physically felt better than the other way
around; disposing felt better than shopping. Maybe I should give _impulse
discarding_ a chance over _impulse shopping_, just for the dopamine hit.

### Insight

### Result
