---
title: "Procrastination Reveals Conflicts"
date: 2025-02-09T09:42:25+01:00
draft: true
---

I'm re-reading Nial A. Fiore's _The Now Habit_ to once again tackle my issues
with procrastination, which is still my biggest struggle concerning my
professional life. While few would describe me as a chronic procrastinator—I
handed in my Bachelor's thesis one week early, for example—there are a lot of
things I do procrastinate. My internal process is usually messier than the
output I produce, and only I know the struggle involved to produce those
results.

Having read _The Now Habit_ before, I struggled to implement the protocols
described therein. I had a haunch that one major issue, which probably not
applies to most readers, isn't discussed in the book: _unresolved_ or even
_subconcious conflicts_.

What I like about the book is that it avoids Freudian psychoanalysis; i.e.
questions like _"What is wrong with me?"_ that only lead to more rumination
instead of productive action. However, one needs to detect possible underlying
causes to find proper countermeasures. In my case, the underlying issue is
_conflict avoidance_. 

I won't analyze the origins of this issue here, but I suspect that introverts
tend to be more conflict avoidant than extroverts, because arguing things out
with other people drains the introvert's social battery, while just analyzing
the conflict doesn't. (However, the avoidant behaviour of analyzing instead of
arguing provides the introvert with good arguments for dealing with the
conflict later.)

One strong indicator for my haunch is that I hardly procrastinate in some areas
of my life, while I procrastinate a lot in others. Writing papers or finishing
school projects was never an issue, and neither is working on my personal
projects. Programming within an organisation, however, is sometimes a huge
issue.
