---
title: "Separating the Thought from the Mind"
date: 2024-11-13T22:55:25+01:00
---

Holding a thought in your mind and inspecting it at the same time is hard. Just
thinking the thought already requires working memory. Thinking _critically_
about it at the same time is probably too much mental strain for a non-trivial
thought. The obvious solution is to write the thought down.

Writing not only frees up working memory, it also creates a distance between the
thought and yourself. A thought held in your mind is still a part of yourself. A
thought written down as a proper sentence is a separate object. It could have
been written by you, or by any other person. (Re-reading one's old texts often
feels strange, because there was—hopefully—a further development of one's
thoughts in the meantime.)

As mentioned in the post about [Putting Ideas into Words](#4), improving a text
requires reading it with the eyes of a pretended stranger. This is easier with
written words than with thoughts held in your mind for the reasons stated above.
Improving a text improves the phrased out thoughts. So it is more effective to
write a rough thought down and further develop it as a series of written words
than to improve a thought directly in the mind.

Thinking while walking is a habit held in high esteem by many thinkers. Taking a
walk to think about an issue is also something I like to do. But I notice that I
often tend to get stuck in a loop of thoughts rather than further developing it
as I walk. Walking _is_ beneficial in many ways, and I wouldn't want to miss out
on it. But to get more out of a walk than the exposure to fresh air and sun
rays, I need to think more effectively while walking.

However, I don't want to carry a notebook with me while walking. A better
approach would be to write down my thoughts _before_ the walk, quickly review
what I've written before I leave the house, and then think intensely about what
I've written during the walk. As I return home, I shall immediately write down
my thoughts and insights gained from the walk, thereby further developing them.
