+++
title = "The Experiment"
date = 2024-11-10T15:14:00+01:00
+++

This blog is supposed to be an experiment. I'd like to practice three skills:
reading, thinking, and writing. First, I must read some material worth thinking
about. Then I must think about what I just read. And then I must write down my
thoughts. I'd like to do this every day, even though it's the busiest time of
the year.

Building up my concentration is a project I can no longer postpone. I was able
to build up some considerable discipline in many areas of my life, e.g.
programming Rust every single day for more than half a year without missing one
day, or getting up at 5 o'clock a.m. consistently and row for ten kilometers on
my Concept2 ergometer.

However, when it comes to work, my discipline and concentration all of a sudden
vanish. Maybe it's the environment, maybe it's the cognitive dissonance I feel
when doing work for other people, or maybe it's a lack of stamina when it comes
to unpleasant things to do. (Rowing at 5 o'clock in the morning with a hangover
after three hours of sleep _is_ unpleasant, but in a different way.)

This blog is supposed to be a documentation about my efforts. I don't know what
I'll write—and read, and think, for that matter—about, but most important is the
consistent daily effort.

I just finished reading Cal Newport's _Deep Work_, probably for the third time
in the last couple of years. However, this time I marked a lot of passages. I
did so because I'd like to summarize this book.  But this time I'm not trying to
write the usual neurotically comprehensive book summary about it. Instead, I'll
read a part of a chapter, think about it, and then combine the author's message
with my own thoughts about it. I'd like to write _short essays_.

This blog was created using Hugo. I first wanted to pick a minimalistic blog
theme, but even the simplest ones seemed too bloated for my efforts. So I wrote
my own minimalistic template, which doesn't even support taxonomies. The only
navigation feature is the anchor for each post next to its publication date,
e.g. [#2](#2) referring to this post's title.

If the page will get too long after 20 posts or so, I'd like to include
pagination. But there will always be full blog posts displayed; no separate
article pages being teased on a landing page. Pure simplicity. The only luxury
is the font being used: _TeX Gyre Schola_, which weights ~200kb. It's not the
perfect font, but it has everything I want: serifs rendered nicely on a display,
a nice italic style that can be combined with bold, and it looks rather bookish
and conservative.
