---
title: "Why Minimalism Works"
date: 2025-01-11T19:43:54+01:00
---

Minimalism is about getting rid of unnecessary items, so that you only have to
deal with the things that are really important to you. Discarding items is a
question of what to remove and what to retain.

New year's resolutions usually focus on the _what_: exercising more, getting
enough sleep, finally learning how to play the guitar, etc. Sometimes, they are
also also about the _what not_: stop smoking, less shopping, no more
binge-watching, etc.

The _whats_ are often picked without knowing where the time and energy for
those activities is supposed to come from. And the _what nots_ don't answer the
question what to do instead, thereby leaving a void. And neither _whats_ nor
_what nots_ say where you'll be getting the necessary willpower from.

With minimalism, you go through your posessions and ask yourself: am I really
going to use this any time soon? If so, you retain the item, and become aware
of the thing you'd like to do in the near future. If you discard the item, you
not only have less clutter around, you also deprived yourself of an option,
which you no longer have to consider, thereby saving willpower by avoiding
decision fatigue.

When planning activities for a certain period, be it a day or a year, you not
only have to ask yourself what you are going to do, but also what you are _not_
going to do. I planned to revisit the programming language Clojure once again
in the first quarter of 2025. This also means that I'm not going to invest
any time into learning Rust, Haskell, or any other programming language during
that period. Every decision comes with its opportunity costs.

So don't just decide on particular positive or negative resolutions, but always
also decide on its counterpart: When you decide to do something, also decide
what other things you won't be doing. And when you decide to abstain from
certain behaviour, also define a proper alternative to fill the void.

This is not just some kind of neurotic game to fill in all the gaps of a
two-column table, but it actually clarifies the costs of things: Activities
require time and energy, so you'd better clarify what you're willing to
sacrifice for it. Weaning yourself off of some bad habits requires a lot of
willpower, so you'd better make sure you have an enjoyable but less harmful
replacement activity prepared. It only works if you're taking the time to
balance the equations before you try to get started with improvements.

Minimalism is very explicit about opportunity costs, for you probably can
estimate the value of any item rather quickly, and after discarding it, you'll
also notice the value of the space that has been freed up. And unlike
addictions, you rarely ever think about going back by re-purchasing things you
just discarded. It's rather like exercising: it feels a bit painful at first,
but after a short time, you'd like to repeat the experience by discarding more
useless stuff. You'll also hardly remember what you've thrown out a couple of
days later, so that any guilt of discarding supposedly "good" items vanished
quickly.
